this is an awesome awesome space so
congratulations to great area for it and
also cool that you're on mission rather
than Valencia good call so I'm going to
show four areas of work that I've had
the good fortune to have worked in so
let's begin this is a very young a
Nicholas Negroponte a true like the one
you have in your phone except back then
it cost $75,000 nodding the gimbal was
recycled for my thesis project
Mik Alyssa's interest was researched for
future teleconferencing systems and this
is super 8 film projection like the
Talking Heads of the Haunted Mansion at
Disneyland which you probably I've seen
the following year is the first of a
series of installations originally in 16
millimeter of film and this is from the
Pasadena show in 2005 and as in video so
I hope you can see that what's going on
is that it's a film projected back on
the original room after the original
room has been spray-painted white and
you know it's kind of the reason we do
this stuff is to have the first-hand
experience
note the guitar by the way so you're
seeing a secondary representation
so we all know projection mapping today
and here's the Wikipedia entry which
lists the Disney Haunted Mansion heads
first than displacements and then the
work in the late 1990s at University of
North Carolina and there is a backstory
here Nikolas and I first visited
Disneyland to see the talking heads and
in the late 1990s I visited UNC to give
a presentation so the dots actually
connect and here's something a little
bit a little bit more recent now I don't
know them
note the guitar so they did give me
credit and there are several others like
you gotta love it I I do um so this is a
longer story we all recognize this there
the Google Street view camera cars which
record panoramic images at regular
distance intervals this is a camera car
from 1978 that recorded panoramic images
at regular distance intervals another
MIT project called the Aspen movie map
and the brown blob of hair with a white
jacket on top is me we use stop frame
film cameras in a bicycle wheel you see
on the back to trigger them and it looks
kind of like this
so the look
it's not video streaming video and it's
not still photos and it's not computer
graphics it's this distance triggering
that's kind of its own animal so we had
to film going through every intersection
every possible way and up and down every
street and perhaps more than any one I
kept at it for a bunch of years here's
an electric cart with another stop frame
film camera triggered by an encoder on
the axle for the Paris metro in 1986 yes
that is a mime we hired her to add
visual continuity and this was for a
kiosk to help people find their way
around
here's a project with the Exploratorium
in 1987 and we used this large expensive
gyro-stabilized motion picture camera
and a helicopter and you know by the way
the replacement for this today fits in
the palm of your hand it's actually very
very cool and I think Casey was going to
be talking about this a bit tomorrow
morning so this is the installation and
the idea was to not recreate flying
around the Bay Area as much as giving
you a hyper real superperson style
experience by moving the trackball in
this tight length away here's a project
for the zkm Center for Arts and Media
and Carl's her in 1991 this time the
stock frame cameras connected to the
trans odometer and we had a chance to
install it with large scale projection
that was properly scaled that was
orthoscopic ly correct so it actually
felt like a giant window and because of
the rail the imagery has the Sun rivaled
stability that's almost CG like um
in 2009 the Z camera shot everything for
the then and now installation and
they're giving me too much credit I
really had nothing to do with that um
but it's noteworthy that Germany has
been the most defiant country regarding
Google Streetview over 200,000 people
have opted out from showing their homes
and the fat lab did one of the greatest
art pranks ever there which was
mentioned this morning but ask them
about it get some more details it's
pretty amazing but there were no
problems in Karlsruhe where this is an
art project and I I suppose there's a
lesson there this is now 1993 of
stereoscopic rig everything so far has
been 2d for the Banff Centre for the
Arts and for a bunch of reasons we
packaged it as a 19th century
Kinetoscope and turning the crank gives
you that similar tight link feeling like
the trackball in the Exploratorium
project but with your eyes on the eye
hood it actually looks wide-angle and as
they say ortho stereo
the camera was exhibited at the Computer
History Museum as part of the Google
Streetview show and the Kinetoscope is
in the American Museum of the movie and
image and out so it almost felt like
there was film inside turning the crank
so at this point after 15 years of
making these I stopped I concluded that
it was a dumb idea
and that would really was needed was 3d
modeling and here's some early research
that was fueled by her footage at
interval research working with computer
vision gurus Harlan Baker and John
Woodfill and with interns Paul to bovec
and a budding artist Leo Villareal now
cut to 2006 and you know Google wouldn't
be doing both Google Earth and Street
fill the Street View if they needed to
and that's still true both 3d models and
2d images each have their own advantages
and around that time I cheerlead a
project at USC that was trying to look a
bit further ahead and this was another
collaboration between artists and
researchers and Google gave us a
research award in 2007 to work on it so
the idea here is to combine the folks
anomic free for all of Flickr and
Instagram and Facebook photos with a
visceral feeling of flying around that
you get with Google Earth and the trick
of course is to pose the image to
situate the images so that they appears
perfectly aligned overlays in a 3d
computer model and of course they can be
historical photos as well but when it's
you know this is different than push
pinning geotagged images on a map when
they're situated like this and if
they're situated right it's magic
and unlike say Microsoft Photosynth
which is biased toward using the most
neutral of photos to help them make
their model we wanted to use the most
personal photos and encourage how they
could be used inside a pre-existing
Google Earth um so there's some current
news on this you may have heard that
Mattel reintroduced the viewmaster a few
months ago with Google Earth and Google
cardboard folks so we're currently in
discussion whether the USC viewfinder
project can be used to situate their
library of zillions of place-based
stereo images possibly through
crowdsourcing with the potential for
perfectly photography and that would be
very cool so liveness in the sense of
mediated liveness is a totally new
modern concept that Abraham and Kanaan
may have been able to imagine his family
in or and Queen Isabella and Spain might
have been able to kind of think where
Columbus was in the new world and
Napoleon and Egypt may have wondered
what morning what Josephine and Paris
was having for breakfast but not the way
we do that there's something magic about
this idea of liveness that does require
electronics mediation so the question
what's live now and how about when there
are a billion video phones they can all
webcast broadcast so in 1998 I cheer led
another project that Paul Allen's
interval research looking into live
video we realized that live spontaneous
video has a unique search problem time
and we developed the idea of a hot now
button that enabled people to send
alerts and encourage real-time
propagation the result was a startup
called kundi there was Swahili for
flocking swarming and hurting we
launched in 2001 we had a great team
that included Camille Norment who's
currently representing Norway in the
Venice Biennale and Steven DeBary who
was in 2012 on the ebony magazine Power
100 List we had a hot now list and an
updated every ten
seconds and that was unheard of at the
time this before dig before Twitter and
it lasted a year then closes the bubble
burst an interval got a couple patents
out of it from kundi ten years pass and
when in 2010 Apple announced FaceTime
some of us said Surf's Up yeah you know
all we have to do is hack FaceTime to be
one-to-many and started working on a
relaunch now out of us USC with some
help from NYU particularly ITP professor
Sean Vann every who'd had a similar
history and was working a lot with
witness.org
Sean hacked the FaceTime one-to-many
system for the ITP summer camp for
adults in 2011 i webcast from the front
lines of mayday on Wall Street in 2012
and we developed strategies for how
real-time webcasters remote curators and
more webcasters can create an emergent
real-time network for anyone to view but
something happened at the same time when
we began in 2010 like literally the same
month um so I don't know how much of you
know about this but Paul Allen's lawyers
sued everyone Google Apple Facebook
Yahoo AOL whatnot over for patents from
10 years earlier from the interval days
including the kundi patent where I'm
listed as lead inventor which the
lawyers believe covers among other many
things to the facebook like button and
it's currently looking like a
multi-billion dollar proposition and
inventors have no financial stake in the
outcome and it just turned out of the 19
inventors I was the only one at the time
actually working in the same space as
the invention you know so I felt both an
opportunity and a responsibility to
represent the geese while the lawyers
were all fighting over the golden eggs
and went public with the statement so
you can find this on my web site
um that was vetted by both the
commercial lawyer and a lawyer from the
Electronic Frontier Foundation
it's really hard to know how this is
going to play out the one thing for sure
is that the lawyers on all sides are
winning you know and the case will
likely go on for years so after spending
much more time than I'd care to admit
and much too much time with lawyers and
a lot of frankly dark energy by last
summer I conceded that I had to wait
this one out in the penalty box then
last spring most of you know the story
about how meerkat launched right before
South by Southwest Twitter announced
buying periscope both courts are very
very similar to kundi and live TV and
now it appears that the world is ready
and it turns out that my former partners
from both kundi and live with me are in
discussion about a relaunch so forgive
the melodrama but there may be a big
narrative here you know actually several
can makers triumph over lawyers does
experience matter can long-term research
find how at higher ground stay tuned so
we all know the birth legend and I think
it's safe to say that this time it
really is for real and the amount of
intensity and money flowing and energy
particularly in Silicon Valley and
Hollywood right now is is really
unrivaled this is from last Monday with
Jaron Lanier we hadn't seen each other
in years and it turns out he coined the
phrase virtual reality and I asked him
if he regretted it and he explained to
me that he wanted a name to reflect the
ultimate something unachievable not like
television or book or even computers um
and I said to him that today people say
things like my VRS better than your VR
or I'm doing VR you're not doing VR and
Jaron could
stop laughing he seemed genuinely
bewildered how misunderstood this is
today
and by the way of Rita's new books
they're provocative in a slightly
different but converging space and
probably right anyway here's my vr
kidding so this was a project from quite
a while ago using a very large camera
system that could record stereo
panoramic motion pictures this is in
Timbuktu that's actually the Sun Corey
mosque an ancient University that there
was fighting then there's fighting now
as Barry mentioned in the last session a
lot of these buildings are some of them
have been destroyed and are in jeopardy
so the idea is to have the image wrap
around rotate around the viewers but
it's a wide stereoscopic image with four
channels sound and it turns out it was
easier to rotate the audience and rotate
the projection so this is what the
screen the curtain down but again you
have to be there because within seconds
everybody is convinced that it's
rotating around them and it's the
feeling that you all have when you're on
a train in the station and the Train
next to pull pulls out and you think
you're moving but you're not so it was a
very very strong visceral illusion which
is what I was shooting for here to feel
the place in 20 2008 when 3d televisions
finally became available this is now
back at USC we realized that we could
take the footage and stagger it in
perfect sync and it's 60 degree
horizontal and get a nicely contiguous
in this case 180 degree trip kick now if
a dog barked on the first screen 20
seconds later would bark again on the
second screen but you know it wasn't so
bad and there are no perfect solutions
for cameras which we'll get to in a
moment so this is an image from the
original installation and the boy in
Timbuktu appears almost in front of the
rail with the 3d glasses and that's
about the limit of what you can do with
a screen based stereo VR headsets are
awesome the 1 to 10 foot
there's this new kind of intimate media
that there's really no other way to feel
and as much as I love public space and
immersion I'm convinced that the VR
headset experiences unlike anything that
can be done Chris milk that convinced me
of this eventually this is just a Google
search for VR cameras and you see that
most of them are badass you know they
must be 360 I've been there and you know
what incredibly most of them are going
to fail in the close-up intimate zone
though there will be unresolvable
stitching artifacts it's hard to believe
I have a slideshow online you can find
called VR cinematography if anybody
wants to dive deep into it and here's
one solution something we're working on
right now and this is just a quick
teaser it's one solution and the idea is
a wearable camera no cameras behind your
head those are in stitch about there are
people doing it and they are insatiable
and when the operator moves their head
because of the inertial measurement unit
we can move the whole image around so
it's not 360 all the time but it's
virtual 360 if you want to call it that
and you know this needs to be tested um
because of my past experience I actually
think it's going to work very well
and the applications include intimate
sort of things like interviews but also
action sequences integrating the 3d
models and you know sort of a Max
Headroom thing and this is a current
team we are seeking collaborators
possibly intern so anyone interested
come up to me and support of course see
me after and by the way this is not like
glass Google glass this is not a
wearable computer this also takes
pictures this is a camera period um and
the inspiration is more from the long
trajectory of real-world cinema
riki Leacock was a mentor and friend and
cooking buddy and was part of a group
that invented tools driven by their
passions in the group included Don
pennybaker L and David Maysles Bob drew
and John Roush in Paris
Rickie's mentor was Robert flower T who
made Nanook of the North in 1922 so
we're going back to the very birth of
documentary cinema and here's Ricky with
Robert and his wife Francis shooting
Louisiana story in 1948 so it's these
very long very deep trajectories that
for me helps keep me grounded in the
day-by-day dealings with our Skybound
but sometimes nearsighted community
thank you